user/start/sources.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

.. Copyright (C) 2019 embedded brains GmbH
.. Copyright (C) 2019 Sebastian Huber
.. Copyright (C) 2020 Chris Johns

.. _QuickStartSources:

Obtain the Sources
==================

You have considered and chosen a suitable installation prefix in the previous
section.  We have chosen :file:`$HOME/quick-start/rtems/5` as the installation
prefix. We will show how to use a released version of RTEMS and then as an
alternative we will show you using the :ref:`RSB Git repository
<QuickStartSources_Git>`. Consider using a Git clone if you wish to make
contributions to the RTEMS Project.

You need the RTEMS Source Builder (RSB) to work with RTEMS and we prefer you
use a released version. A released version of the RSB downloads all source code
from the RTEMS servers. Each release archives all the referenced source
providing long term stability as changes in upstream projects do not effect a
release's build.

You will need approximately 1.5G bytes of disk space to build the tools, RTEMS
kernel, network stack and 3rd party packages for the ERC32 BSP.

.. _QuickStartSources_Released:

Releases
--------

You can download the source archives for a released RTEMS version from RTEMS'
servers. Releases can be view at https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases with
the releases listed as a series under a release's major number. For RTEMS 5.1
the release series is `5 <https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5>`_ and the
release path is https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1.

To work with the archives of a released RTEMS version, simply replace the
version number ``5`` used throughout this chapter with the version number you
selected, e.g. ``sparc-rtems4.11``, ``sparc-rtems6``, and so on.

Download and unpack using the ``curl`` and ``tar`` command with these commands:

.. code-block:: none

    mkdir -p $HOME/quick-start/src
    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    curl https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1/sources/rtems-source-builder-5.1.tar.xz | tar xJf -

If ``curl`` does not work consider using ``wget`` or a browser.

The RSB is unpacked under the path ``rtems-source-builder-5.1``. Rename this
to ``rsb`` to get shorter paths during the tool suite build. To do this run
these commands:

.. code-block:: none

    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    mv rtems-source-builder-5.1 rsb

.. _QuickStartSources_Released_RTEMS:

If you wish to build the RTEMS kernel from source obtain the RTEMS kernel
sources:

.. code-block:: none

    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    curl https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1/sources/rtems-5.1.tar.xz | tar xJf -

.. _QuickStartSources_Git:

Git
---

Alternatively, clone the Git repositories into :file:`$HOME/quick-start/src`.

A Git repository clone gives you some flexibility with the added complexity of
needing to use a Git branch to build a released version.  With Git you can
switch between branches to try out different RTEMS versions and you have access
to the RTEMS source history. The RTEMS Project welcomes contributions.  The Git
repositories enable you to easily create patches and track local changes.

You can clone the Git repository to get all versions of RTEMS including the
development head.  Release branches in Git are kept stable however they may
differ from a release's source archive.

.. code-block:: none

    mkdir -p $HOME/quick-start/src
    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    git clone git://git.rtems.org/rtems-source-builder.git rsb
    git clone git://git.rtems.org/rtems.git

The :file:`rsb` repository clone contains the :ref:`RTEMS Source Builder (RSB)
<RSB>`.  We clone it into :file:`rsb` to get shorter paths during the tool
suite build.  The :file:`rtems` repository clone contains the RTEMS sources.
These two repositories are enough to get started.  There are `more repositories
<https://git.rtems.org>`_ available.

Offline Download
----------------

If you have limited Internet access you can download the source before you
start building. If you are permanently connected to the Internet you do not
need to do this and the sources will be automatically download on demand when
needed.

Once the sources have been downloaded you could disconnect your host computer
from the Internet.  It is no longer required to work with RTEMS. To download
the sources to build the ERC 32 BSP before building run the following commands:

.. code-block:: none

    cd $HOME/quick-start/src/rsb/rtems
    ../source-builder/sb-set-builder --source-only-download 5/rtems-sparc

This command should output something like this (omitted lines are denoted by
``...``):

.. code-block:: none

    RTEMS Source Builder - Set Builder, 5.1.0
    Build Set: 5/rtems-sparc
    ...
    download: https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1.0/5.1.0/sources/gcc-7.5.0.tar.xz -> sources/gcc-7.5.0.tar.xz
    ...
    Build Sizes: usage: 0.000B total: 143.814MB (sources: 143.793MB, patches: 21.348KB, installed 0.000B)
    Build Set: Time 0:05:52.617958

If you encounter errors, check your internet connection, firewall settings,
virus scanners and the availability of the download servers.

Commit message:

quick start variable version number

user/start/sources.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0

.. Copyright (C) 2019 embedded brains GmbH
.. Copyright (C) 2019 Sebastian Huber
.. Copyright (C) 2020 Chris Johns

.. _QuickStartSources:

Obtain the Sources
==================

The chosen RTEMS version (5 for a released build, 6 for the git clone) will be 
replaced by $RTEMS_VERSION for some parts of the Quick Start.
You have considered and chosen a suitable installation prefix in the previous
section.  We have chosen :file:`$HOME/quick-start/rtems/$RTEMS_VERSION` as the installation
prefix. We will show how to use a released version of RTEMS and then as an
alternative we will show you using the :ref:`RSB Git repository
<QuickStartSources_Git>` master which uses RTEMS version 6. 
Consider using a Git clone if you wish to make
contributions to the RTEMS Project.

You need the RTEMS Source Builder (RSB) to work with RTEMS and we prefer you
use a released version. A released version of the RSB downloads all source code
from the RTEMS servers. Each release archives all the referenced source
providing long term stability as changes in upstream projects do not effect a
release's build.

You will need approximately 1.5G bytes of disk space to build the tools, RTEMS
kernel, network stack and 3rd party packages for the ERC32 BSP.

.. _QuickStartSources_Released:

Releases
--------

You can download the source archives for a released RTEMS version from RTEMS'
servers. Releases can be view at https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases with
the releases listed as a series under a release's major number. For RTEMS 5.1
the release series is `5 <https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5>`_ and the
release path is https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1.

To work with the archives of a released RTEMS version, simply replace the
version number ``5`` used throughout this chapter with the version number you
selected, e.g. ``sparc-rtems4.11``, ``sparc-rtems6``, and so on.

Download and unpack using the ``curl`` and ``tar`` command with these commands:

.. code-block:: none

    mkdir -p $HOME/quick-start/src
    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    curl https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1/sources/rtems-source-builder-5.1.tar.xz | tar xJf -

If ``curl`` does not work consider using ``wget`` or a browser.

The RSB is unpacked under the path ``rtems-source-builder-5.1``. Rename this
to ``rsb`` to get shorter paths during the tool suite build. To do this run
these commands:

.. code-block:: none

    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    mv rtems-source-builder-5.1 rsb

.. _QuickStartSources_Released_RTEMS:

If you wish to build the RTEMS kernel from source obtain the RTEMS kernel
sources:

.. code-block:: none

    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    curl https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1/sources/rtems-5.1.tar.xz | tar xJf -

.. _QuickStartSources_Git:

Git
---

Alternatively, clone the Git repositories into :file:`$HOME/quick-start/src`.

A Git repository clone gives you some flexibility with the added complexity of
needing to use a Git branch to build a released version.  With Git you can
switch between branches to try out different RTEMS versions and you have access
to the RTEMS source history. The RTEMS Project welcomes contributions.  The Git
repositories enable you to easily create patches and track local changes.

You can clone the Git repository to get all versions of RTEMS including the
development head.  Release branches in Git are kept stable however they may
differ from a release's source archive.

The master branch by default uses RTEMS version 6 and does not 
contain the version 5 `rtems-sparc` build set.

.. code-block:: none

    mkdir -p $HOME/quick-start/src
    cd $HOME/quick-start/src
    git clone git://git.rtems.org/rtems-source-builder.git rsb
    git clone git://git.rtems.org/rtems.git

The :file:`rsb` repository clone contains the :ref:`RTEMS Source Builder (RSB)
<RSB>`.  We clone it into :file:`rsb` to get shorter paths during the tool
suite build.  The :file:`rtems` repository clone contains the RTEMS sources.
These two repositories are enough to get started.  There are `more repositories
<https://git.rtems.org>`_ available.

Offline Download
----------------

If you have limited Internet access you can download the source before you
start building. If you are permanently connected to the Internet you do not
need to do this and the sources will be automatically download on demand when
needed.

Once the sources have been downloaded you could disconnect your host computer
from the Internet.  It is no longer required to work with RTEMS. To download
the sources to build the ERC 32 BSP before building run the following commands:

.. code-block:: none

    cd $HOME/quick-start/src/rsb/rtems
    ../source-builder/sb-set-builder --source-only-download 5/rtems-sparc

This command should output something like this (omitted lines are denoted by
``...``):

.. code-block:: none

    RTEMS Source Builder - Set Builder, 5.1.0
    Build Set: 5/rtems-sparc
    ...
    download: https://ftp.rtems.org/pub/rtems/releases/5/5.1.0/5.1.0/sources/gcc-7.5.0.tar.xz -> sources/gcc-7.5.0.tar.xz
    ...
    Build Sizes: usage: 0.000B total: 143.814MB (sources: 143.793MB, patches: 21.348KB, installed 0.000B)
    Build Set: Time 0:05:52.617958

If you encounter errors, check your internet connection, firewall settings,
virus scanners and the availability of the download servers.
